IRIXBASIC Interpreter 0.1 Alpha
July 31, 2012 - RetroChallenge Edition

Created by Andrew Hazelden
Based upon uBASIC by Adam Dunkels

IRIXBASIC is a simple BASIC interpreter that was developed for the 2012 Summer RetroChallenge. The goal of this project was to add graphics capabilities to the existing uBASIC interpreter and port it to Silicon Graphics IRIX. The program uses SDL for graphics along with the SDL_ttf and SDL_gfx libraries.

I have included a few sceenshots to show what IRIXBASIC looks like when it is running on IRIX 6.5 on my Silicon Graphics O2 system.


Starting IRIXBASIC
------------------

You need to launch IRIXBASIC from the command line so it knows the path to the IRIXBASIC font, default script, and the program icon.

When you run IRIXBASIC from the command line you have the following options:

Usage: irixbasic <script.bas> [options]
Options:
  --window <width> <height> [-fullscreen]
    Set the size of the main window


Here are several command line options you can explore:

You can start irixbasic and launch the default program (scripts/default.bas):
./irixbasic

You can start irixbasic and launch a specific program:
./irixbasic scripts/waves.bas

You can start irixbasic and launch a program in a resized window:
./irixbasic scripts/waves.bas --window 800 600

You can start irixbasic and launch a program in fullscreen mode:
./irixbasic scripts/waves.bas --window 1280 720 -fullscreen


Language Syntax
---------------
IRIXBASIC works with the standard BASIC syntax:

Here is an example of a print command:
10 cls
20 n = random
30 print "Your lucky number is: ", n, "."
40 end

The print command writes text on the screen. You can use words in quotes, numbers, and integer variables, you can add a comma to insert a space between each item, or a semicolon to keep the text together


Here is an example that shows a for / next loop:
10 for x = 1 to 100 step 10
20 print "loop: ", x
30 next x
40 end

The step command is optional and can be used to increment the for next loop faster,


Here is an example of an if / then comparison:
10 c = 5
20 if c<10 then print "c is less than 10" 
30 end


Here is an example of a goto command:
10 print "Hello World!"
20 goto 10
30 end


Programming Notes:
The BASIC scripts need to use line numbers and the last line of every program should finish with the "end" command. 

Variables in IRIXBASIC are the lowercase letters a-z.

The IRIXBASIC program works with integer based math.

If no script name is provided from the command line the default script will be run. The default script is called "default.bas" and is located in the relative file path:
scripts/default.bas

The REM command doesn't work at the moment so you can't have comments in the file.


I added the following graphics oriented commands during the RetroChallenge:

cls / clear
Clear the screen using the current backcolor.

forecolor 255, 255, 255
Set the foreground drawing color using r g b values (0-255)
	
backcolor 255, 255, 255 
Set the background drawing color using r g b values (0-255)

plot x, y
Draw a colored point using the current foreground color value.

line x1, y1, x2, y2 
Draw a line onscreen using the current foreground color value.

moveto x1, y1
Move the position of the next graphics drawing command.

lineto x1, y1
Draw a line from the last drawing position to the current x / y position using the current foreground color value.

circle x1, y1, radius
Draws a circle using the current foreground color.

fcircle x1, y1, radius
Draws a filled circle using the current foreground color 

sleep 1000
Add a delay in milliseconds. ( 1000 ms = 1 second )

timer
Elapsed program runtime counter in seconds. The timer output may reset after running for a while.

random
Generate a random number from 0 to 127.

srand 25
Use a random seed value to randomize the number generator.

cos 1
Returns a 7-bit integer cos value. An output of -127=-1,  0=0, and 127=1

sin 1
Returns a 7-bit integer sin value. An output of -127=-1,  0=0, and 127=1

button
Returns 1 if the mouse button is pressed and 0 if it is released.


Example IRIXBASIC Scripts
--------------------------
The following examples are included with IRIXBASIC to get you up and running.


boat.bas
	Draws an ASCII art boat onscreen using the print command.

circles.bas
	Draws random circles onscreen.

click.bas
	This demonstrates the mouse "button" command. The script shows a green circle when you click the mouse button and a red circle when the mouse button is up.
	
countdown.bas
	This is a countdown to launch example that uses the sleep command.
	
default.bas
	This is the default program that is run if you don't type in the name of a script.
	
hello.bas
	prints the words Hello World onscreen until you press the escape key to quit.
	
light-rays.bas
	Draws colored lines onscreen using moveto and line
	
mega_circles.bas
	Draws even more random circles onscreen.
	
random.bas
	Prints off 10 random numbers. This demo doesn't the srand function so it has the same result every time.
	
text.bas
	Draws colored text using the forecolor command 
	
timer.bas
	This script starts a 15 second countdown using the timer command.
	
waves.bas
	This shows an integer based wave drawn using cosine.